To science fiction lovers, if there are any mathematicians in the crowd who are
purists in the way the word infinity is used, I apologize in advance, but I warn
you if you get too rough on me I'll fight back. My claim is that science fiction
is an infinite activity, that there is no end to it. It can go on for ever and
ever. Amen! people can keep writing new stories, working out new ways of having
fun with the business, painting new pictures, I don't care how, making up more
movies, plays, television things, there is no limit. This is my opinion for what
it's worth. I'm going to spend the rest of the yak in trying to defend it. To do
so, I'll have to stretch things perhaps a little bit. I'll have to include in
science fiction stuff that isn't pure, correct, hard, solid science fiction such
as I always write. I'll have to let in occasional things which even have errors
in them, horrid thought, like the notion that a planet which spins rapidly
enough could have an elliptical cross section and have three g's at the equator
and 600 at the polls you know uh since it became easy to steal computer time
lots of people have checked up on me on that one and apparently mesclin would
have come to a point of the edge don't blame me i couldn't get hold of a
computer in 1952 so uh the errors will have to come in and they will ease very
gradually over the edge into what is frankly fantasy, and I don't really care
where the line is drawn. But as long as we put this stuff all together, I still
think there's no end to it. Now the mistakes cropped up even way back in the
beginning in the days of Jules Verne when I was young. And the first of the
slides represents an interesting story which all of you have read but but not
this version of it. It seems there was a hero who had a scientist friend and a
girlfriend who in this particular version was not the scientist's daughter. And
he had a very wicked enemy and the enemy came bouncing around to kill him and
fired a bullet and the young lady heroically thrust herself in the way and what
with one thing and another, there was a bullet lodged beside her spine. And it
just happened that the hero had recently invented a device for reducing human
beings and other things to extremely small size. And this was published when
Isaac Asimov was 14 years old. He didn't write it. It was called A World Unseen.
It was written by Joseph William Skidmore, and it appeared in Wonder Stories in,
I think, the February and April issues of 1934. But I could be a bit out.
There's another first fandom type over there who can always check me up. Next
post, my memory isn't perfect equal. Okay, good. When I speak of errors, I don't
say that maybe someday someone won't reduce things in size through some horrid
by passing of the laws of quantum mechanics. At the same time, I'm extremely
doubtful that a typhoid germ really looks like that. And before you blame artist
Paul, the author described the various organisms which were met with and this
delicately nurtured and healthy young lady's body in considerable detail and the
illustration wasn't all that bad as far as the description went there were fangs
and glaring eyes of what a typhoid germ or maybe this was the tetanus one I
don't really remember now would be doing with eyes I'm not entirely clear
considering the amount of light probably available anyway it was is a nice,
adventurous story. I enjoyed it when I read it back in my middle teens, and I
didn't find it all that bad when I reread it a few years ago after latched onto
a couple of copies of the magazine again. Don't think I got them from you
Howard, sorry.
Anyway, in this whole theme, the story was the question, are you entertaining
somebody? Maybe you aren't if he's the sort of person who wants every story he
reads to have a moral or a political point or something of that sort. But even
something like this can be entertaining. And it's one little fragment of
infinity. Okay, let's see if it changes faster today.
It does. I'm getting some things out of the way. Remember, I have been an
astronomy nut for 47 years. From the beginning to me, science fiction was rocket
ships and Martians. And I'm simply proving for the first few slides that I'm not
a completely closed mind type. You can have science fiction in other places. And
this slide and the next, for example, go into the question of how about re
-engineering human beings so they can breathe water. this was norman knight's
story and well the dates all there i don't have to brag about my memory this
time crisis in utopia and one could do a little bit of criticizing about those
foreign type gills for a number of reasons but i won't another theme a variation
of the same theme and here's what i'm starting into the infinite variations is
in the next slide this was not It had nothing to do with genetic manipulation.
Okay, let's add the next one. This was an accident, and having been written by
Sprague, the camp was a rather humorous accident. The poor aquarium assistant,
who had been experimenting in his spare time on a drug which would alter lung
tissue sufficiently to permit an air breather to breathe underwater,
accidentally got a few whiffs of his own drug and found he couldn't breathe air
and was running off for help from his office after the Aquarium head. Passed out
from lack of air and fell into the dark tank. And had problems for the next 24
hours or so. As I say, with Sprague, it was more funny than serious science. But
Sprague stuck with the custom of the time and came up with a fairly logical
-sounding excuse for the whole thing. He remembered details like handling the
reflex, which would ordinarily prevent a person from breathing water. We do have
some automatic controls there, which are supposed to keep water out of the
windpipe. And once again, it was a good story. But let's get on closer and
closer to the rocket ships and Martians. I don't remember just what comes next,
and I can't continue the talk until it does. okay this is still from way back
when the next three slides deal with jack williamson's legion of space pure
beautiful formula type space opera which i loved then and i love now but which
you could start branching out on all right so i ended the phrase with a
preposition Indefinitely in this particular story they were chasing off to
Bernard's runaway star to preserve the solar system from the horrid Medusa and
incidentally to save the girl who had been kidnapped and zipped off to the star
to get the secret of the invincible weapon from her this was the 1930s the point
is that that same story could have been written and probably has been written
not only with other variations but from various other viewpoints now the medusae
the natives of bonnard star that's supposed to be bonnard star were the
villains. Actually, Jack was not as ruthless as he sometimes is. He had
destroyed the Earth's moon and wiped out the outpost of the Medusa there at the
end of the story. But as far as I know, he allowed Bernard Starr to continue on
its way, but the Medusa's still there. I had just a little touch of sympathy for
those critters. I didn't blame them for wanting to move from this place. Let's
go on to the next picture while we're at it. And I didn't blame them
particularly for defending their planet with the belt of peril, which Jack
described in such detail. They were refugees from their own environment, as Jack
described, but you could be sorry for them. There was only one city full of them
left, the four creatures. The city is in the next picture. And you can write a
lot of stories about the Medusa's side of the affair or what the Medusa did
before, or what the Medusa did afterwards. It's branching. And this is my point.
These branches, and as soon as you write one of those stories, it's gonna branch
too. So let's keep on with the branches. Don't blame me for the description
there by the way. I don't know how you could get a sky that red. Jack said that
there was an organic aerosol designed to trap the heat, which made the sky look
red. So the picture was painted with a red sky, don't let that worry you. You
have all read at least some of Sprague de Camp's Krishna stories, this is an
illustration from the hand of Zai, a time in which the Shambour was fleeing a
couple of pursuing valleys and made it through a straight, too shallow or the
galleys by taking advantage of the fact that Krishna's three moons all happened
conveniently to be full and in conjunction simultaneously. It made a nice
picture and it made a nice story, but variations, again, well, it's funny, it
did so many of the variations. There's no point pursuing that theme you've read
rogue queen get along tower of zanod rogue queen was the most popular but i'm
not entirely sure it was the best it was darn good okay
well i have to get myself into it too here and there Some of you may or may not
recognize the same, and we hope for the best. This is the sunless planet
Omotwenen, which is a story for the first of the stellar anthologies. It was in
the vicinity of the Orion Nebula, which shows in the background. This is the
point near the beginning of the story where the native is pausing to catch
dinner. You remember, he had an interesting personality which he didn't have all
that self-control when it came to satisfying his hunger. And his human passenger
was in no position to be in a hurry because you never quite knew how you'd want
to satisfy his hunger. So he permitted the fellows to stop and catch a fish and
eat it. The next painting shows the planet itself. This was the point I started,
as far as I know. Yeah, next one if you can. The possibility of sunless planets.
Well, I didn't really start it, Neel R. Jones had one of his Professor Jameson
stories back in 1934, December 34 and I know because it's the first magazine I
ever bought.
however dear mr jones fond as i have always been of the professor jameson
stories didn't know all that much science and his sunless world was hollow which
is extremely difficult to justify on any astrophysical grounds i came up with
the notion that any sort of reasonable theory of planet formation and star
formation suggests strongly that there should be lots of objects planets out
there, which are too small to be suns and you may as well call them planets. And
if they're sufficiently late generation objects, such as something in the Orion
Nebula might be, they could easily have enough heavy elements, uranium and
thorium, so that at places on their surfaces, they might be warm enough to have
liquid water or in this particular case, I think I use liquid hydrazine. What
the hell? Just a variation. some the science fiction writers are very very
ethical in that connection by the way I had started a story on this theme
somewhere in the early 1960s I ran into Poul Anderson on a Triple A s meeting
and told him about it I got tied up to me that died on me I never confine in
Finnish I got my character into a hole that I couldn't get him out off This was
a rewrite of it, but I had to start over. And I told Poul about this and Karen.
And we were talking about how I could get out of it. Poul, believe it or not,
felt that he should write sunless world stories because I had come up with the
idea. Well, that's being too damned ethical. I'm all for ethics. But as far as
I'm concerned, sunless planets are probably a fact of nature. And I have no
copyright on them. And if any of you want to write stories about sunless worlds,
fine. If you want to write stories about Oma Tweenan, write me and I'll give you
more of its specifications. I'm all for it. Let's pursue the variations. Let's
get a little closer to infinity. And if any mathematician shoots, I'll shoot
back. Okay.
That's, at least I could recognize it from a glance. That's one of the standard
far-future ones, but one of the better-done far-future ones. That's the Earth
about 3 billion years from now as described in a fair amount of detail By Poul
Anderson in his story epilogue, which I think should have got a hero It was a
beautiful job in which the formula part of it was explorers with the first
faster-than-light drive inadvertently taking full time to go where they went and
they got back about three billion years later. But it was, the theme was a very
good one which should be followed in more detail. It was written shortly after
that article in Scientific American which talked about self-replicating machines
which would be set floating on the ocean to take minerals, mineral supplies,
metals and so on from the water. They would not only do this, but be able to
replicate themselves and put new little machines which would grow. I used a
variation of the theme later in the mechanic. In Poul's story, three billion
years from now, the sun had climbed some distance among the, well above the main
sequence, as it probably will. It was a good deal hotter. Earth was no longer
habitable for life of our type. But some of those machines had survived,
mutated, and and the chief character was a rather humanoid descendant of the
machines. And it was a damn good story, and I still think it should have had a
Hugo. Well, that was the earth's front there. No vegetation left, browns,
blacks, tans. Areas that were sparkly, plant growths had, I suppose, silicon
cells, though foil didn't exactly specify. But there was an energy absorbing
variety of life and a variety equivalent to animal life, though it had a few
abilities denied to us. Some of the food it ate it could instead of eating, it
could take spare parts and insert them directly bypassing a lot of chemistry. In
fact, the chief character suffered injury during the story. got one of his
forearms blown off his wife I guess we can use the word an immobile almost
immobile version of the machinery was producing at the time and they were able
to take a replacement arm from the unborn child and fasten it onto daddy and
just leave the child to cook a little longer I like this story all Right? Let's
go on.
We're again, this is part of a collaboration between the fall and me, somebody
many years ago wrote a letter to John Campbell reminding him of the, remember,
those twain triplet things, the petrified planet where three different authors
were asked to write a story about the same planet. This one was one with Silicon
Bay's live surprise. This fellow went to John Campbell and asked why some more
of this wasn't done, specifically suggesting that Poul and I be used. John being
the sort of person he was, instantly xeroxed the letter and sent copies to Poul
and me. And for the next five years or so, we corresponded gradually building up
a solar system planetary system i worked out the astronomy he worked out the
planetary ecology like each of us making suggestions to the other but we were
responsible for it that way the final question was where was this thing going to
do it was a system with a g-type star sun type star with fairly earth-like
planets or at least one fairly earth-like planet and the other member of the
binary system was a somewhat more massive star which is now off the main
sequence and gone up to red giant stage and i worked out all the temperatures
that would happen as the star moved around its orbit and then the question was
where would it be in space because red giants are highly luminous objects and we
had to fit this into somebody's universe and explain why it hadn't been found
from the earth if it wasn't enormously far away and it wasn't and i said okay
let's put it right in front of a globular cluster where nobody will notice it
from Earth, at least for a few million years until we get out of line, and Poul
bought that. And this is a photo, a painting of the system seen from fairly
close to. Some of you probably read the only story that's come out of this thing
so far, Poul's fire time. Theoretically, I have equal rights in it and someday I
may write something about the same system but being a spare time writer, I
haven't gotten around to it. But again, there's an infinite number of variations
here. I'll probably write my stories on Planets of the Red Giant, which may have
had life in the past, and in fact established as having had life in the past,
but they're going to be overcooked now and I'm going to have my people walking
around in temperatures much too high for a convenient life. I'll think of
something to happen, but I don't know when, the next couple of pictures are
illustrations from the same general thing. Yes? Pardon? Most of them are mine.
That's the planet, Ishtar, Poul worked out the geography, the continent
arrangement, I did the picture as a present for him. This is set up close to
firetime, a view from Ishtar's moon, with one side of it lighted by its own sun
and the other much more dimly lighted by the approaching red giants that the
reflection of the giant in the ocean here as you see the reflection of moon or
sun from space okay
uh paul uh paul's naming he follows the tradition of using mythological uh gods
from this that or the other uh not pantheon what's the word i want religion
anyway yeah he named all the planets after the babylonian bunch uh there would
he worked not very logically i don't remember enough babylonian mythology now to
figure out exactly what he did but the planets uh what are planets of the
falsight star were named after children of one of the major gods and the planets
of the other star were named after children of the other he was very careful
about that i don't remember them all myself.
That the landscape on the planets as fire time was coming, the regular
sun is setting and the red giant is in the sky, bringing its warnings of doom and all that to the
life forms. I should write a story or two on that planet as well. I can't say anyone do it
or want this time because it's not entirely my property to do it with, but if it weren't for
that I'd say go ahead. And if you want a system like that that isn't this same one,
write me and I like to cook up planetary systems, and I've done it for friends
occasionally. But the themes are endless. The version that we cropped up with in
this one, and which Poul mentioned, and which can go on, was that the life on
the planets of what is now a red giant had had the other kind of amino acids,
which ordinarily wouldn't happen...if both wouldn't happen on the same planet, I
don't think, that whichever one first developed replicating power would take
over the chemistry. But the intelligent beings from the red giant, two or three
billion years ago before it was a red giant, had colonized the planets of the
yellow star, and traces of their occupations still remained, whether the life
-forms were descendants of the intelligent colonists or descendants of the
bacteria they brought with them I wouldn't know after the four billion years who
would know but this planet had life forms on it some of which were other type of
amino acid and the others with a mirror image which produced an ecology which
Poul had a great deal of fun with okay it
was almost on the side. It's a painting of mine as well, and it represents an
ambition I had never succeeded in fulfilling. That is Nadrak of Palaine Seven,
one of Doc Smith's characters. It was partially four-dimensional, and I want
someday to paint a believable four-dimensional picture, but I just haven't
succeeded yet, and I brought it in to mention that the fourth dimension is used
rather frequently and has its own little infinity of story ideas and i won't
pursue that one any that has
taken rather deep hold in the culture in the last 10 years or so which also
allows itself to be used in a variety of ways, especially playing the science
fiction game, capital letters. The game used to be that the author did his
damnedest to write a story with no scientific errors in it, and after he had it
published, the readers did their damnedest to find errors and write nasty
letters to the editor's column. It is an unfair game.
The author really is at the short end of this stick. Once he's written and
published the story, he's made all the moves he's allowed. And everyone else can
jump on him for the next 40 years if his book stays in print, God willing.
There's a better way. and I will credit Gene Roddenberry for indirectly, not
deliberately, but as a result of his activities, teaching me that better way.
Never mind shooting down a Star Trek episode because it is a scientific error
here and there. That is ethically shooting a sitting bird. It is much better and
much more of an intellectual exercise and much more fun to take a Star Trek
episode or a science fiction story, assume that it is accurate reporting from
soup to nuts, and then try to fill in the scientific background, the things that
would have to be true so that it could be accurate reporting. And this is
sometimes a job. The first time I tackled it was the episode Dorothy Fontana's
This Side of Paradise, which is a very nice earth-like planet. which everybody
was perfectly healthy because of those damned spores, which also were very
efficient tranquilizers. And the only catch, really, aside from the fact that
nobody ever said just what Berkhold rays were, that it was stated to be a planet
of Omicron CD, specifically Omicron CD-3. Omicron CD is otherwise known as Myra.
It is a red supergiant semi-regular variable, and how a planet could be a
paradise for human beings and circle that sun was a challenge to repeat myself.
I based a talk on it at the first of the New York Star Trek convention, the one
where they were expecting maybe 600 or 800 and stopped counting at around 2,500
and sort of started the theme. but if the talk went over well and I kept doing
this for several years and it's great fun and of course every damn time you fill
in the background like this there's about 500 more story lines uh the next few
slides go through some of the ones that did and I'll be as brief as I can no
they don't either for god that was a strictly decorated one which was inspired
by Oh, there. Summons from Hunter. That's the Pleiades. Polino. Who, come on. I
blanked.
Lovecraft, yeah. Lovecraft, yeah. Lovecraft inspired one and I probably didn't
mean to put the slide in just that place, but since he's there, he's there. And
let's go on anyway. Anyway, Lovecraft has his own infinity of branches, and this
was meant to branch us into the idea of painting. It was about the point I was
going to admit that I had done some of these paintings, but somebody beat me to
this question. You can get emotional as well as scientific about this. This was
meant just a sort of impressionistic painting, the title was Ion Storm, and I'm
quite sure that the ion storm in that particular Star Trek episode didn't look
like that, but it was fun to paint anyway. Somebody bought it, which was all to
be good. The next one, I think, is in the same general line. Yeah. The skull
doesn't show up as well on a slide as it did in the original painting. It was
called Chalindur Passage and it came from James Schmitt's Witches of Paris. And
it was kind of fun to do. And someone brought that, too. They do sometimes,
okay.
And here I have to admit that I made mistakes as well. This is entitled Castor
Close-up. And it reflects the idea I had of the caster system, for I'm
embarrassed to admit most of my professional life. And the only lucky thing is
that I never did try to write a story on that particular one. The idea is that
Castor as seen from Earth is a binary in any moderately good telescope. You see
this star and this star. Some distance away is a much fainter star, Castor C,
YYG, and it's a triple system. And all three of the stars are spectroscopic
batteries.
I have yakked for I don't remember when we finally got started but I'm sure it's
been over an hour. I will not feel hurt if anyone wants to go out, eat supper,
buy an orange, buy some coffee. On the other hand I am perfectly willing to sit
here and answer questions until the cows come home or the committee says the
room is needed for the next whatever's going on. John. So here I am. Here you
are if you want to stay.
The first Viking shot that they had, I guess PBS had some sort of coverage. I
mean, we discussed it at the time. The first shot seemed to have like a sort of
a swirl effect in the aperture. This is Jupiter or Mars? Ah, Mars.
Well, I don't remember the early Viking ones. I didn't see the TV presentation.
When Mariner 9 first went by. Viking 1 and 2 were the recent landers. I didn't
see those swirls. I don't know. It could have been dust. Mariner 9, you
remember, when it first arrived, had to wait a month before it could get any
good pictures because of a practically planet-wide dust storm. The pictures were
very similar to the ones you showed here at the rocky surface. Yeah. It also had
that squirrel effect. Have they ever heard any plane? I haven't seen them, so I
can't offer one either. I've always thought the atmospheric pressure of Mars is
calculated, or is that me? Oh, well, the Vikings have measured them. Measured
them? Originally, from Mariner 4 on, they were calculated from occultation
effects, the radio beam from the probe as it went behind Mars Mars went through
successively different deeper layers of atmosphere and they were able to get
some pretty precise stuff from that. But now they have direct pressures as well.
Rather interesting, the air is mostly carbon dioxide. During the time from the
Viking landers' first measurements and the time they shut it off because Mars
had gone beyond the sun, the total air pressure had run down about 10%. And the
presumption was, it was winter at the north pole and the atmosphere was freezing
out as CO2 in the North Polar ice cap.
Wait a minute, North Polar? No, it's South Polar winter now, I'm sorry.
Carbon dioxide by far. Dry ice temperature under air pressure is about minus 78
Celsius. Oxygen's freezing point, I don't know exactly, but it's more like minus
200. Yes. The stripes...are going this way.
But it seemed to me that it was sort of like if you got one of those newspapers, they can cut
it in strips and then disalign them a little bit so that it's a little bit
crooked. Yeah. This is possibly what happened. the
camera was taking a very narrow spot image the probe was spinning I think about
three times a second and the spot trailed across the planet looked around
trailed across a slightly an adjacent band and so on and I assume it was the
side of getting out of step which you suggested would produce to this sort of
thing
can be done here is what
it seems to be if the color the reddish or orange color which Titan shows in the
telescope is blue through colored gases like oxides of nitrogen then no it's not
a scattering effect it's an absorption effect and that the light will be red
regardless This is the direction you look, orange or red. Ever taken high school
chemistry and seen what happens when you drop copper into nitric acid, the
beautiful reddish brown stinking fumes that come off? That's the stuff. In 02.
You don't know that that's it, by the way, but it's about the simplest guess.
Yes. This isn't exactly a question, but an observation. I've seen it here. I
think that these young people think so much of.
Uh, my background is, I didn't discover scientific fiction in 1950s. After I took on the
conversion project, I got science fiction. And I can remember feeling very different from you.
I read all this speculation about art because it seemed that I would never know.
Yeah.
When you were reading back in the
30s, did you have .
I was firmly convinced of it. I have only recently and very reluctantly given up
hope of visiting the moon and Mars personally. I have reached the age of 54 and
it doesn't look as though I would be able to pay for a passenger ticket to
either place. And I know damn well I'm too old to be taken as a pilot or
researcher. I haven't flown an airplane for 23 years let alone a rocket. I'd
love to go. I don't know what I'd give to go but it would be most of what I own.
All I can say is I didn't...I haven't drawn as raw a deal as poor Willie Lay who
died a month before the first moon landing.
Yes? Do you think there might be some progress or is there any interest in
trying to find
the question there is a very very hard one to answer if you say someone like me
says that he has his doubts about the possibility of anti-gravity well I risk
letting my button snipped off and drummed out of the science fiction course at
the same time I'll try to say this in a way to justify my pessimism without
sounding as though my imagination had completely disintegrated. Anything like
that would demand what we generally call a breakthrough. A genuinely new
discovery in the basic laws of physics. I don't say that this is impossible. I
simply say there is no way to evaluate its chance. And justifying the spending
of public money on it is even more difficult. I am greatly in favor of some
millionaire who's got his own money and is interested in it researching anti
-gravity or flying saucers or Astrology at the once. I just feel that none of
those things are probable enough, given what we know think of as the rules of
the game, to justify a very large fraction of our available efforts being spent
on How soon will these shuttlecraft be available, and I think in fact there's
something... Yeah, its first one is rolled out, is undergoing what you might
call captive flight tests, isn't it, being pinned on top of the 747 or something
like that, having its aerodynamic qualities worked out. I don't know when its
first orbital flight is scheduled for, but we're working on it. You think
they'll ever have a wee passage? I think eventually yes, granting the
continuation of our technological culture. which we may or may not manage to
keep up. I happen to be in favor of it strongly. I like my little pocket
calculators and the intellectual exercises they make possible. I'm quoting
almost directly from my article on atomic power in the current Galileo at the
moment. I like to get much more crude about it. I much prefer toilet paper made
for the purpose to any of the substitutes I've had to use on the farm and in
camping during my lifetime, and from all of those various levels, I am very much
in favor of a highly technical culture. I like books. Yeah, we have it. And
while I suppose I might survive in one in which our technology was gone and 95%
of the population would have to spend 18 hours a day muscle-powered dirt
farming, I don't think I'd enjoy it. I have done muscle-powered dirt farming. My
uncles in Canada were farmers. I used to spend the summer with him and frankly
calling turnips is a useful and noble action but it's not for me yep anybody
personally you don't have to answer that one fine you'll make a living in it
what do you have how much do you have to sell a year when you want to make a
living you spoke about I don't know what I would have to sell a year to make a
living because I don't make my living at it I'm a high school science teacher
and a science fiction Writing and science fiction painting are paying Hobbies I
am not particularly embarrassed But I don't know if the answer is very Russo
last year Between Painting and selling But the selling included money From books
like mission of gravity Published 25 years ago I grossed about Six five hundred
or seven thousand dollars Or On the order Rather less than half my teaching
salary so i'm not living on science fiction probably i i can't speak for all of
them i think poor anderson makes his entire living by writing but not entirely
science fiction isaac asimov of course makes his living by writing but well he's
a special case he shows withdrawal symptoms if you get him too far from a
typewriter
And most of the other science fiction people I know do not make a living at it
It's more of a paying hobby as it is with me I don't know Probably He sold well
enough in his heyday so I rather suspect that he did and probably still does His
books are constantly being reprinted I mean I got a modest but perfect but but
not refusable check for about 160 bucks two days ago for italian blueprint
rights for mission of gravity now who am i to sneer at this it's that's why i
say the answer may not be all that useful to you in the beginning you're not
getting this sort of thing it's the sort of stuff that accumulates after you've
been writing for years and maybe eventually i'd be able to retire on it but
Fortunately, I won't have to depend on it even then I'll have Those are pensions
school pension and I don't know if they'll allow me to collect social security
with all that other money rolling in But I thought I won't need it
You started with the science fiction idea, then wrote a story around it.
That's my technique as a rule Even with with the hard science fiction
based on something key with planet There are still two ways to go at it. My more
usual one is to start with the oddball planet. I see an article in Sky and
Telescope about a peculiar star, and I read it up, and then I start figuring,
well, how far out would a planet have to be from this star to have an average
Earth temperature? And what peculiarities would the star produce if it were that
far out? How can I complicate the issue by tilting the axis or making the orbit
a little bit eccentric? I have a great deal of fun with my HP 25 at that point.
I'll have a lot more when the 97 comes. And eventually, I've got a very peculiar
environment in which all sorts of oddball things can happen and then I can write
Mission of Gravity. The alternative, which I am not so good at doing, but which
is perfectly kosher for playing the game, is to decide what sort of environment
you want for your story. You may even have a pretty good idea of the story
already and the environment it needs and then cook up a planet which could have
that environment and cook up a planetary system in which such a planet could
exist. And I would be perfectly willing to do this if I happened to have the
pertinent idea. Not too many science fiction writers happen to have the
background which lets them do this. I'm not bragging and simply mentioning that
not too many writers besides myself majored in astronomy as undergraduates. On
the other hand, we're a fairly friendly bunch. We swap information with each
other. Isaac used to call me up on a rather regular basis when he was doing that
science column for, what was it, magazine of science and fantasy, I guess,
science fiction and fantasy. And he'd always be calling me up. He lived near
Boston then checking up on astronomical wits. He's a biochemist. He doesn't know
all that much astronomy. me in fact i must regretfully say that i had just
reviewed his book on Alpha Centauri and he made a gross slip but i won't tell
you what it is
much less i read up on viruses and there wasn't a hell of a lot known about them
in 1948 which was when i was doing the research i think it was about 40 oh it
was earlier than that wait a minute well i got the idea about the summer of 45
And was fooling around picking up information for the next three years or so.
The first version of the story was finished in 1948. Sent to John Campbell and
he rejected it for a number of excellent reasons. And I did the 40,000 word two
-part serial. Sold it to him somewhere much later in 1948. And it appeared at
first I think in April and May of 1949. But the research there was entirely
biological. and not very much was known about viruses in those days. So in
writing a sequel, as I'm supposed to be doing now, I'm having to do a lot of
covering, but I'm damned if I'll tell you where.
The contract initially said manuscript would be turned in September 1976.
By September 1976, I had about 7,500 words done and spills started. I started
over again on Christmas vacation and did about 8,500 more words starting from
scratch once more maybe I can use the first 7,500 but I've got a way to go yet
the contract's been extended to September 77 and I hope I don't have to
strengthen them for another extension they might want their advance back instead
and this would be bad.
He can't win ... years ago. He can't win again.
Well, this happens and some people can get away with it. I lack the gall or
self-confidence, whichever you want to call it, to feel sure that I'm one of
them. I have told my wife if she wants to go to her sister's in the Bahamas for
spring vacation, she may go and take our daughter with her. I'm not going. I'm
staying home with the typewriter. whether two and a half weeks spring vacation
will really produce the rest of the book is a wide open question but at least i
keep getting more ideas and writing them down so maybe something can happen this
spring i hope so i'd like to get it off my conscience so i can feel i can do
something else
never never when I've written the typed out the final draft what I've told
myself firmly is the final draft I can just barely bring myself to read it
there's some sort of acute postpartum depression there and uh when it comes out
as a book i feel even worse i know there are things i should have done otherwise
takes several years usually before i can read the book of any sort of comfort
yes we got a question well if that's it that's it what time is it anyway okay